So how do we open the device camera?
The good thing is, if you remember the first section of this module, Flutter actually uses Dart and
it runs on an engine
so to say, which gives you direct access to the system, to the operating system you're running on. So you
can directly tap into such native device features, Flutter gives you a direct bridge to these features
and later in the module by the way, I'll also show you how you can actually write your own native Swift
or Java code for iOS or for Android and connect that to your Flutter code and you'll see how easy
that is because Flutter has all the features it needs to talk to the underlying platform,
so iOS or Android, it has all the features it needs to talk to that platform built-in.
So therefore talking to iOS or to Android to open a camera is really simple,
still you would have to write some Java or Swift code to really then tell Android or iOS to open
a camera
and of course that's not something we want to do here because chances are, you don't know Swift,
you don't know Java and the good thing is for all the common interactions you want to have with your
device,
so things like working with maps or working with the camera, you got packages which you can install that
take all the heavy lifting away from you and just give you a couple of Dart methods you can call to
open a camera, to open maps and so on.
There are official packages managed by the Flutter team and tons of unofficial ones managed by the community
and if you search for image_picker here on pub.dev,
you'll find a couple of plugins that help you with selecting images and definitely feel free to
explore them all, the one I'll use is the image picker plugin here.
This is a great plugin which makes it very easy to work with the device camera, select an image or take
an image and then work with that image.
It has detailed installation docs here and as always, the installation starts by going to the installing
tab here and copying that dependency,
and then simply go into your pubspec.yaml file here and there,
add it and then save it and as always, it fetches this automatically, if it doesn't, run Flutter packages get
in the terminal after navigating into this project here.
So with that added here, we can start using this package to open the camera.
So here in image_input.dart, you now can import a package with package: and it's the image picker
package and there, the image_picker.dart file. With that added, you can go down here to this function which
is triggered when this FlatButton is pressed and there,
I now want to start taking my image. Now since we have a bit more code in there,
I'll actually use a named method here, a named function, so that
this is a bit nicer to read, our code is a bit more structured and I'll name it
take picture and I'll come back to the type this returns in a second and in here, I'll use image picker and
we don't instantiate this,
instead you use this as a class which provides a couple of static methods and
if you click on it, you see it has static methods in there like the pick image method and you already
see this that this will return a future. So you can call pick image here to open the camera and take an
image
and this returns a future because of course that will take a while to finish, at least until the user
pressed the camera button and confirmed the image.
So here, we'll get back a future and therefore I want to use async await
and therefore here, we'll return a future,
here however a future which won't yield anything
but here I of course want to await for this image to be taken and then we'll have the image file as
a response here and
that should be final.
So in the end, after the image took and confirmed the image, we'll have an image file here. Now pick image
needs to be configured,
you need to provide the source argument and define what your source for the image should be because
there are two sources and you can use the image source enum for that which is provided by the image picker
package and there, you have the camera or the gallery.
Now I want to use the camera but of course, you could also use the gallery instead to let the user
take an image from there and another argument you can define is the max height or max width and I'll
restrict the image or automatically crop it to a max width of 600
so that our image isn't too big because of course modern phones really have high resolution cameras and
you therefore shoot large images
and for this app, we don't need such a large image,
so to save some space on the device and also speed up our app, you should of course ensure that you only
take images in a size that you really need and don't take high resolution images if your app doesn't
need them,
if it does of course, do so.
So here, that will now configure the image I want to take, it will take the image and thereafter, it will
store it here in image file.
Now let's hook up the take picture method here to this button,
so point at take picture, without parentheses, don't want to execute this method when the code gets passed
but instead when the user presses the button and with all of that, we're almost there
but one super important thing is missing. Often, when working with native device features like the camera
or with the user location, you need to ask for permission before you use these features and therefore
you need to add some extra setup and you see that also in the package here in the README file and
basically, whenever you're working with a package that leverages some native device feature which needs
permissions,
the official documentation should tell you about that.
So the official docs here for the plugins you are using are always worth having a look at because they
tell you what you need to configure for this package to work correctly.
Of course, you should not just check the README for packages that use native device features,
you should actually read the README for all packages you're using but especially for packages that
use native device features,
you should have a look so that you don't miss any setup.
And here we get extra hints on how to configure this for iOS and for Android and for Android, as you
see we need no extra config
but for iOS, we do. There, we need to edit the info.plist file in the iOS runner folder.
Now if you're on Windows or Linux, you won't have an OS folder because you can't build iOS apps there
but if you are on macOS, make sure you go to the iOS folder in your Flutter project and there, to the
runner folder and then to info.plist. info.plist is a configuration file for the iOS app where you
set up things like the version number of the app but also some permissions you need and the text
you want to show in the permission prompts which iOS automatically shows to the user when the user
is about to use the camera, use the location,
anything like that.
So here you see three keys which you should add,
so just copy that name
and then in here, you can pick any place, maybe here above that key UI storyboard
name,
so right next to such a key entry, not between key and string or a key or whatever because these entries
always belong together, you have a key and then that's the value for the key,
so don't enter your new entry between such a key-value pair but instead, add a new key here with these
opening and closing elements here, key
and then again key with a forward slash between the angled brackets and then enter that key which you
got from the official docs
and now the value here is a string because you enter some text which is displayed to the user when he
basically is about to use a feature that needs that permission.
So here, this would be the permission you need when you want to use the gallery,
we're actually not using that
so we technically don't need this but in case you want to use the gallery, add this permission,
that's why I'm showing it here.
So here you can display any text that gets the user to confirm this or give you the permission,
so we need to take a picture, maybe you provide a more meaningful text than that but I think you're getting
the idea here.
So another permission which we need to add for our app here certainly is the camera usage description,
you need that when you want to use the camera and I'll show the same text here,
you could enter a different text of course and then here, the microphone usage, you only need that
if you want to take a video where you also record the audio,
we're definitely not doing that here
so we don't need to set this up.
So this here, the camera key, that's the important one for us, if you want to use the gallery, you also
need that and if you want to record videos, you also should ask for permission to record the audio. With
that, we're all set for iOS, as the official docs state, we don't need a special setup for Android,
so with that, we should now be able to press that button.
Let's do a full refresh and then let's see whether that works.
Let's go here to the add place screen, click take picture and I'm actually getting an error here,
no implementation found for method pick image on channel plugins.
Now this should be a problem that can be solved by closing our process and fully rebuilding or restarting
the app
simply because we added a plugin that taps into native device functionalities that can sometimes lead
to problems, so let's do a full restart here and now let's go back to that add place screen, click take
picture again
and now this opens up the camera here.
Now the first time you launch this, you get this info screen here,
so I'll simply go back in that case here, leave the camera and let's press it again,
camera opens up again
and now here we can take a picture
and confirm this with the check mark if we're happy. This closes the camera
and now we got a handle to that image,
it's now stored in that variable but of course now we need to do something with that variable to save
it on our local device in the file system there.